GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: countdown to the New
Hampshire primary. We hear the
candidates' final pitches
one day before voting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead: why
NATO and the U.S. plan on
beefing up military forces
against
Russia.
GWEN IFILL: And Miles O'Brien on
the ground in Brazil, the center
of the Zika virus outbreak.
DR. ADRIANA SCAVUZZI,
Obstetrician: Try to solve the
medical problem won't be enough.
You have to change the quality
of people's life. Otherwise, you
will not solve this problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: It is primary eve in
what is, for now, the center of
the political universe,
New Hampshire.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins is in the Granite
State, as she kicks off our
coverage
of the high-stakes
sprint to the finish.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: Good to
see you guys.
LISA DESJARDINS: They were in
Manchester, chatting with
diners.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate: Let me
tell you, sir.
LISA DESJARDINS: And in
Plaistow, taking questions from
veterans.
Republicans and Democrats,
favorites and long shots, nearly
all the candidates were going
all out, seeking out undecideds
and trying to turn their rivals'
supporters into their
own. For Republican Marco Rubio,
that meant shaking off criticism
that he came off as
canned in Saturday night's
debate and pressing his message
at a town hall in Nashua.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate: People
keep -- there's -- in the press,
anyway,
oh, why do you keep saying the
same thing about Obama trying to
change America? I'm
going to keep saying that a
million times, because I believe
it's true.
LISA DESJARDINS: For Chris
Christie, Rubio's dogged debate
night foe, it meant keeping
the heat on the Florida senator
at a town hall of his own in
nearby Hudson.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R-NJ),
Presidential Candidate: When the
lights get that bright, you
either
shine or you melt. We cannot
afford to have a president who
melts.
LISA DESJARDINS: And for Jeb
Bush, Rubio's
one-time-mentor-turned-rival, it
meant taking
up his own line of attack
this morning on MSNBC.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: He doesn't have a
record. That's not to say he's
not
gifted, because he is. He's a
gifted person. And he will be a
leader going forward. But
he doesn't have a proven record.
LISA DESJARDINS: Bush's campaign
also put up an ad today hitting
at another of his rivals,
John Kasich.
MAN: The CATO Institute gave you
a D on its government's report
card this last year.
LISA DESJARDINS: But Kasich, at
a town hall in Plaistow, stood
by his record on budget
issues as Ohio governor.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate: We were
way in the hole. Now we're way
in
the black.
LISA DESJARDINS: In the
meantime, the Republican
front-runner here, Donald Trump,
has switched
tactics after his runner-up
finish in Iowa. He tried his
hand at retail politics in
Salem,
instead of holding one of
his signature rallies.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: I love these things,
even more than making
a speech, because I love to hear
the feedback. I get some good
questions.
LISA DESJARDINS: And on
the Democratic side:
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate: Join
with us in making that political
revolution.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS:
Thank you all very much.
LISA DESJARDINS: Next-door
neighbor and Vermont Senator
Bernie Sanders pressed his
apparent
advantage in the polls in New
Hampshire. He also drew ever
sharper attacks from Hillary
Clinton's camp. Last night, in
Milford, it was former President
Bill Clinton.
BILL CLINTON, Former President
of the United States: For her,
this is not about grand theories
of revolution. This is about
whether we can improve people's
lives.
LISA DESJARDINS: The former
chief executive went further,
accusing Sanders supporters
of profane and sexist attacks on
his wife. And on Saturday,
former Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright chastised
women voters who back Sanders
instead of Clinton.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT, Former U.S.
Secretary of State: Just
remember, there's a special
place in hell for women who
don't help each other.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: Feminist icon
Gloria Steinem went ever further
on HBO's "Real Time With
Bill Maher." She explained
Clinton's lagging support among
young women by saying -- quote
-- "When you're young, you're
thinking where are the boys? The
boys are with Bernie."
Steinem later apologized in a
Facebook post. The candidate
herself steered clear of all
that fracas and stuck to a more
traditional appeal in
Manchester.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Imagine
that, finally, women not only
get equal pay, but our rights
to make our own decisions
are finally respected.
LISA DESJARDINS: Of course, with
24 hours yet to go, some voters
here already have gotten
all the politics
they can handle.
WOMAN: I will just be really
glad when the primary is over. I
am up to here with the
ads on TV, and you just --
you can't get away from it.
LISA DESJARDINS: But some
candidates may get away from it
for good after tomorrow, forced
out of the race if they
finish out of the money.
And late tonight, some
candidates have sent out
somewhat typical last-minute
requests
for funding. But that includes
some like Carly Fiorina, who are
needing a change in momentum.
It seems certain that both
Democrats running for president
will survive New Hampshire,
but it looks like, of the nine
Republicans running for
president, no one expects all
nine will still be running on
Friday -- from a snowy New
Hampshire, Judy, back to you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa
Desjardins, we thank you.
And in the day's other news,
President Obama says he will ask
Congress for more than $1.8
billion to fight the Zika virus.
It's to be part of the budget he
rolls out tomorrow.
But top health officials today
played down the chances of a
major Zika outbreak inside
the United States.
At a White House briefing, Dr.
Anne Schuchat of the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention
counseled calm.
REAR ADM. DR. ANNE SCHUCHAT,
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention: We do expect to see
infection in people who have
traveled and are returning home,
but we aren't expecting
large-scale amounts of serious
Zika infection. The
recommendations for pregnant
women were
so that we could reduce the
chances that pregnant women
would unknowingly step into
harm's way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The virus is
suspected of causing birth
defects in Brazil and is
spreading across
Latin America. And there was
word today that the U.S. Olympic
Committee is now advising
athletes that they should bypass
the Summer Games in Rio de
Janeiro if they're worried
about Zika.
GWEN IFILL: The political
shockwaves from North Korea's
latest missile launch are still
reverberating. This Japanese TV
footage shows the missile in
flight shortly after Sunday's
launch. But in comments aired
today, President Obama told CBS
that it came as no surprise.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: I think that we
have been concerned about
North Korea's behavior for a
while. This is an authoritarian
regime. It's provocative.
It has repeatedly violated
U.N. resolutions.
GWEN IFILL: North Korea says it
placed a satellite in orbit.
U.S. officials say it's really
cover
for efforts to develop missiles
that can carry nuclear warheads.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Rescuers in
Taiwan have pulled four more
survivors from the wreckage of
Saturday's
earthquake. At least 38 people
died in the quake that was
centered in Southern Taiwan.
More than 100 others are still
missing. Two of those carried to
safety today were
8-year-old-girl
and her aunt who spent more than
60 hours trapped in a toppled
apartment building.
GWEN IFILL: There's been more
tragedy in the Aegean Sea.
Turkish officials say 27 people
died in a shipwreck off
Northwestern Turkey. The
country's coast guard recovered
many of
the bodies, with coffins waiting
ashore for the victims. More
than 370 people have died
since January 1 trying to
make the crossing to Greece.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A new Syrian
government offensive is driving
thousands more refugees toward
Turkey. The Syrians advanced
again today, north of the city
of Aleppo, with the help
of Russian warplanes
and Iranian fighters.
Jonathan Rugman of Independent
Television News filed this
report from inside Turkey.
Some of the images
may be disturbing.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: It was just
after this Syrian child had been
carried in an ambulance in
Aleppo yesterday that
another bomb fell.
The bombs don't discriminate,
and the fighting for Aleppo is
now so intense that the Turks
say up to 30,000 Syrian refugees
are now camped out along their
border. From the Turkish side,
we can't see any of them. What
we can see are tents and aid
going across and ambulances
coming out.
Turkish hospitality appears to
have reached its limit, though
the cross-border trade in
coffins could become even
busier. Well, the Turks are
certainly letting these aid
trucks
into Syria. They're just not
letting the Syrian refugees come
out.
The Turks say they are full to
capacity, that they're trying to
prevent an even bigger refugee
exodus. But there may be another
motive at work here, because, by
keeping Syrian civilians
inside the Syrian border, the
Turks are effectively creating a
buffer zone between the Turks
and
Syrian government forces and
Kurdish forces and so-called
Islamic State.
Of course, millions of Syrians
were given sanctuary here before
the border shut. They
had assumed their relatives
could join them, and now they
can't. Syrian rebels are sending
reinforcement also, but they now
claim that government forces are
just 16 miles from the
Turkish border.
And though the rebels are
themselves using heavy weapons,
Turkey and its Western allies
are laying blame for the latest
exodus firmly at the door of
Russian airstrikes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the
leaders of Germany and Turkey
agreed today to make new
diplomatic
efforts to end the fighting at
Aleppo. German Chancellor Angela
Merkel said she is -- quote
-- "not just appalled, but
horrified" at the toll taken by
Russian bombing.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, Wall Street started the
week with a new sell-off, as
bank
and tech stocks led the way
down. The Dow Jones industrial
average lost 178 points to
close at 16027. It had been down
as much as 400 earlier in the
day. The Nasdaq fell 79
points, and is now off 20
percent from its peak last year.
And the S&P dropped 26.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Peyton
Manning and the Denver Broncos
returned to the Mile High City
today, this time as Super Bowl
champions. The Broncos used a
punishing defense to beat
the Carolina Panthers 24-10 on
Sunday. TV ratings show almost
112 million Americans
tuned in for what was the third
Super Bowl victory in the
Broncos' history.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Hillary Clinton and Bernie
Sanders court the middle class;
campaign representatives and our
Politics Monday duo break down
what's at stake in New
Hampshire; Brazil battles Zika
amid Carnival; plus, what could
be the biggest military buildup
in Eastern Europe
since the Cold War.
GWEN IFILL: Over the years, it's
become the mantra of nearly
every presidential campaign,
improving the lives of the
American middle class.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins is back with a report
on how Democrats Bernie Sanders
and Hillary Clinton
differ in their approach.
LISA DESJARDINS: For centuries,
New Hampshire's rivers and towns
have watched the rise, and
sometimes fall, of the American
middle class. Now Democrats here
are focused on the economy
today.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: We do
have to take on income
inequality. We
do have to create
more good jobs.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
Together, we are going to create
an economy
that works for working families
and not just the 1 percent.
LISA DESJARDINS: Joanne Wood
doesn't have time for a campaign
event right now.
JOANNE CYNTHIA WOOD, Uber
Driver: And now we're
discoverable to anyone nearby
who needs
a ride.
LISA DESJARDINS: The 25-year-old
is looking for her first fare of
the day as an Uber driver,
a new economy job for a
relatively new worker. Joanne is
a decided Bernie Sanders voter
because
she wants the sea change for the
middle and lower classes that
Sanders is calling for.
JOANNE CYNTHIA WOOD: I think the
economy is really up in the air.
It's concerning, because
there are so many people that
are just in so much debt, you
know, myself and my family
included.
LISA DESJARDINS: One ride at a
time, she brings in up to $1,000
a week.
JOANNE CYNTHIA WOOD: I
just got a request.
LISA DESJARDINS: But Joanne is
still far from breaking even.
With $30,000 in student debt
and bills left over from her
mom's heart attack two years
ago, she believes in Sanders'
aggressive
economic rewrite.
JOANNE CYNTHIA WOOD: I don't
have any specific sort of
animosity toward Clinton, but I
love
Bernie for his authenticity,
and, honestly, his policies.
LISA DESJARDINS: New Hampshire
has an enviably low unemployment
rate, just 3.1 percent, but
wages here, like in many parts
of the country, have risen just
slightly in the past decade.
And add to that the fact that
Granite State residents have
mountains of debt, the second
highest student loan debt in the
country. And per-person health
care costs are in the
top 10.
ANDREW SMITH, University of New
Hampshire Survey Center: How
many of you would say that
your friends are really
knowledgeable about politics?
LISA DESJARDINS: Andy Smith
directs the University of New
Hampshire's survey center.
ANDREW SMITH: We are seeing the
most important issue that is
mentioned by Democrats for why
they're going to choose who to
support are economic issues.
LISA DESJARDINS: He's been
talking with his classes about
the candidates.
ANDREW SMITH: The problem that
Clinton has this year is that
she is much, much further
behind Sanders than she
was behind Obama in 2008.
LISA DESJARDINS: Sanders and
Clinton's middle-class policies
differ in scope. Both would
spend
on infrastructure, a stimulus
plan to create jobs, Clinton's
plan $275 billion, Sanders
$1 trillion. Clinton aims to
make public universities cost a
lot less. Sanders would make
them tuition-free.
Clinton, she'd cut out-of-pocket
health care costs. Sanders, he
proposes government-provided
single-payer health
care for all.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: It's a
beautiful day in Manchester.
LISA DESJARDINS: On the trail, a
big rift has opened over the
definition of the middle
class. Both candidates would
raise some taxes on the wealthy.
But Sanders' would start at
lower income levels, which
Clinton implies would hit the
middle class.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: And I'm
the only candidate standing here
tonight who has said I will
not raise taxes on
the middle class.
LISA DESJARDINS: Sanders has
said his health care plan will
be a net gain for many. But
it's not clear which income
levels benefit and lose. He
focuses more on income
inequality
in general.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: The concept
of the rigged economy, what does
that mean? You all know
what it means. What it means is
that most people are working
longer hours for low wages,
while at the same time almost
all new income and wealth goes
to the top 1 percent.
LISA DESJARDINS: Smith at the
University of New Hampshire
thinks the issue of economic
struggle gives more
leverage to one candidate.
ANDREW SMITH: In my view, they
are playing on Bernie Sanders'
turf here, and Bernie Sanders
is controlling the debate. I
think Clinton has moved much
more closely toward Sanders'
position.
LISA DESJARDINS: But even if
Sanders set the terms, Clinton
hopes to win on execution and
with voters like this one. Tracy
Hahn-Burkett is many things, a
former civil rights advocate,
a full-time mother and a
freelance writer with a
well-known New Hampshire blog
called
Uncharted Parent. From her den,
she writes about teen angst,
guns and sometimes politics.
TRACY HAHN-BURKETT, Uncharted
Parent: I try not to make it too
political. But, sometimes,
if it's relevant...
LISA DESJARDINS: Her family
isn't worried about making the
mortgage -- husband Paul
is an attorney -- and they're
grateful. But Tracy has multiple
chronic health conditions
and doctors' bills. And while
they are firmly middle class
now, she doesn't feel secure.
TRACY HAHN-BURKETT: I think the
middle class is in trouble. I
think it's incontrovertible
that the middle class is
shrinking. And the middle class
has always really been -- it
sounds like a cliche to say it,
but the middle class has really
been the backbone of the
country.
LISA DESJARDINS: The family has
a very particular concern
creeping up in just four years.
TRACY HAHN-BURKETT: I don't know
how we're going to pay for my
kids' college. There's
a part of me that says, well, we
will just work it out, like
everybody else does. But
then I sit there and look at the
numbers, and I see the way that
the costs are going
up all the time.
LISA DESJARDINS: When she looks
at the Democratic candidates,
Tracy sees two that she likes,
but one that gets her vote.
TRACY HAHN-BURKETT: I think
Hillary Clinton is best equipped
to actually get things
accomplished.
That doesn't mean that I dislike
Bernie Sanders or his policies.
LISA DESJARDINS: As Tracy looks
for middle-class results,
Sanders supporter Joanne is
looking
for big vision.
JOANNE CYNTHIA WOOD: I don't
think that there's anything
wrong with being an idealist.
LISA DESJARDINS: In New
Hampshire, Democrats know there
is a middle-class question. But
they're divided on which
candidate has the answer.
For the "PBS NewsHour" in
Manchester, I'm Lisa Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In recent weeks,
we have been hearing directly
from the campaigns.
Tonight, we check in with two of
them, both with a lot on the
line in New Hampshire.
First up, Tad Devine. He's a
senior adviser to Bernie
Sanders. And he joins us from
Manchester.
Tad Devine, welcome.
So, Senator Sanders has been
leading in practically all the
polls since last summer. A loss
for
him would be lethal,
wouldn't it?
TAD DEVINE, Senior Bernie
Sanders Campaign Strategist:
Well, see, though, we are hoping
to win tomorrow, Judy. We have
been working very hard in New
Hampshire for many months.
I think Bernie has a very
powerful message that voters
here in New Hampshire are
responding
to. He's talking about a rigged
economy that sends too much
wealth to the top, that is
being held in place by a corrupt
system of campaign finance. That
message, from the very
first day we arrived here in New
Hampshire, has resonated
powerfully with people. And
we think, tomorrow, we will
see the results of that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We all noticed
that former President Bill
Clinton unleashed his strongest
criticism yet of Senator Sanders
yesterday. He accused him of
being dishonest. He said
he's misrepresented newspaper
endorsements. He said his
supporters have made sexist
attacks
on Secretary Clinton, and on and
on. He even brought up data that
was taken from the Clinton
camp last summer.
What do you make of all
this? How do you respond?
TAD DEVINE: Well, I think
it's very unfortunate.
You know, obviously, Bernie
Sanders is doing well here in
New Hampshire. And I think we
have begun to see, after Iowa
and the closeness of that race,
that he's doing well in other
states also. And I think the
Clinton campaign hasn't quite
figured out how they're going
to deal with Bernie. Are they
going to try to put her message
up against his?
I think they have come to the
conclusion that that's not a
winning exercise. So I think
they are going to try for a
while to get him off balance.
And I think, right now, what
Bernie is doing and what the
campaign is trying to do is
really ignore those attacks and
to
make sure that we keep talking
about the issues, like the
economy, like health care, like
how
we're going to deal with climate
change, the big issues that
people are concerned with.
And as long as we can keep
talking about those issues, we
think we are going to stay on
course
and we're going to
do well with voters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, in talking
about Senator Sanders'
positions, Bill Clinton,
President
Clinton, said at one point that
the senator is -- quote --
"hermetically sealed from
reality."
TAD DEVINE: Well, listen, I
mean, this is the fourth Clinton
campaign in New Hampshire
for president, OK, so they have
a lot of experience running for
president here.
And I think they're getting
ready to probably launch attacks
elsewhere as well. But I think
the reality that Bernie Sanders
sees is the reality of the
United States, where its
leadership
is no longer beholden to special
interests to fund their
campaigns. And if we want to
have a new reality in this
country, if we want to have an
economy that works for people,
that doesn't send practically
all the new wealth to the top,
we're going to have the
change the thing that is holding
that rigged economy in place,
and that's the campaign
finance system.
Bernie is campaigning against
it. If we are able to change
that system, we believe we
can change that reality.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Looking ahead,
Tad Devine, where does Senator
Sanders compete well after
New Hampshire? We know there are
a number of contests coming up
in states that are far
more diverse than Iowa
and New Hampshire.
How -- what appeal does he make
in places like South Carolina,
Nevada and the long string
of states to come?
TAD DEVINE: Yes.
Well, we're really excited about
moving on to other states. In
Nevada, which will be
the next event after New
Hampshire, we have built a very
strong campaign on the ground.
We think Bernie's message
resonates very powerfully there.
That was a state that was hit
very
bad by the recession.
South Carolina will be another
important test of strength with
African-American voters and
strength in the South as well.
And we think Bernie's story
resonates powerful there. Bernie
Sanders, as a young man at the
University of Chicago, really
got very active in the
civil rights movement, and he
came to Washington to hear
Martin Luther King speak.
He was arrested while he was a
student there protesting housing
policies. And, really,
if you look at the whole arc of
his life, I think you can trace
it back to those days
in college, where he made equal
rights and civil rights the
cause of his life.
We think we will have a lot of
targets. We think we can win in
small states. We can win
in big states and do well in
places like Texas, win delegates
under our system of proportional
representation in the
Democratic Party.
So, we're hoping early on to
demonstrate that Bernie Sanders
is the strongest candidate
for the Democratic Party. We can
bring new people into the
process, young people
particularly,
who responded so well in Iowa,
where he won by net 70 points
with 17-to-29-year-olds.
Independents, which will be a
big test of strength here in New
Hampshire, we think we
can bring those people into the
Democratic Party as well. So,
we're looking forward to
all these states. We think we
can do well in a lot of them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know New
Hampshire is the first of all
the rest, so we will be
watching closely tomorrow.
Tad Devine, we thank you.
TAD DEVINE: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to
the Republican side.
Tom Rath is senior national
adviser to Governor John Kasich.
He's also in Manchester.
Tom Rath, thanks very much.
So, we know Governor Kasich has
spent a lot of time, invested a
lot of his effort in the
state of New Hampshire. You hear
prognosticators say that he's
either got to come in second
or a very strong
third, given that.
Will he?
THOMAS RATH, John Kasich
Campaign Senior Adviser: Well,
look it, Judy, I think this is
such
an incredibly different election
than any one I have ever seen
that I'm not willing
to put a do-or-die on any
particular position.
I think what candidates have to
do here is establish that they
are credible and that
they can attract a significant
portion of the electorate.
Frankly, I believe the polling
has Donald Trump up around 30,
and then from about numbers two
through numbers six, you
can cover them with a
blanket. It's that close.
So, I don't know what that will
say if you miss your mark by a
point or if you overperform
by a point. I just think this is
a very close race that's going
to come down to the end.
I do not see the middle
coalescing behind anybody at
this point.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you about that, because one of
your competitors, Senator
Marco Rubio, was seen as having
a tough time in that Republican
debate Saturday night.
Do you look at that as a -- just
his being knocked off his game
for a few days, or did
that do more lasting
damage to him?
THOMAS RATH: Well, the problem
with that is, in the world we
live in, it's YouTube and
videotape loops.
Marco Rubio's problem goes
beyond that. He has tried to be
in two lanes at once. And
that's why, when you get into a
question that throws him off the
talking points, he's got
to remember who he's going to
orient himself to, whether it's
the hard right, the ideologic
right, as he did at the end with
his abortion questions, or does
he come across more as
somebody who can bring
people together?
That is really what threw him
off. That will stay with him
long after the back-and-forth
goes on, although, as I said
before, those kind of things,
like "Oops" for Governor Perry,
tend to stay with
you a long time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to also
ask you about Jeb Bush. Governor
Kasich has been lumped
in with this group of governors
seen as moderate who are
competing with each other to
achieve
liftoff.
Who's going to come in ahead,
Governor Kasich or Governor
Bush?
THOMAS RATH: I think we have a
really good chance to prevail.
We have worked very, very
hard here and we have got a good
ground game. I, for months, have
said I do not believe
the reports of the demise
of Jeb Bush's campaign.
He's a good candidate. He's
well-thought-of here. His
campaign has done well. I think
it's a real battle for us with
them. I think, in the end, we're
going to finish ahead of
them. But I'm not going to take
that to the bank there. We have
got a lot of work to do
between now and 8:00
tomorrow night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, Tom
Rath, let me ask you about that
group of voters, the
undeclareds,
the independents in New
Hampshire. They can vote in
either party. What do you expect
them
to do?
THOMAS RATH: Well, I think
they're going to do what they
usually do, which is, at some
point, mystically, they make a
decision and they all go en
masse to one or the other.
It's like they send a secret
message out or something.
It happened with McCain twice.
And I think it sort of happened
with Hillary Clinton the
last time. They are hard to
predict. They are terribly
engaged. We did one of the last
town halls with Governor Kasich
this morning, and one woman who
was undeclared said this
was the fifth time
she had seen him.
So, they're paying attention.
And we hope to get a good share
of them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: No prediction?
THOMAS RATH: I think we are
going to do all right. I would
say two, three would be a very
acceptable result. And I think
we could even do -- we could
probably even be stronger in
terms of separation, if
things broke right for us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tom Rath, who is
working hard for Governor John
Kasich, we thank you so
much.
THOMAS RATH: Thank you, Judy.
GWEN IFILL: The eve of the New
Hampshire primary is the perfect
time for Politics Monday.
I'm joined by Tamara Keith of
NPR in Manchester, New
Hampshire, and Amy Walter of The
Cook
Political Report.
Amy -- Tamara, I'm going to
start with you, because you are
sitting in the cold in
Manchester,
New Hampshire. And you're
covering up close what looks to
me like a collision between
gender politics and generational
politics involving Bernie
Sanders and Hillary Clinton,
but mostly self-inflicted wounds
from Hillary Clinton's people.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Absolutely. Her
surrogates and supporters said
some things
that are not going to make young
feminists happy, that have upset
young feminists, in
fact, and it sort of counter to
the message that Hillary Clinton
herself has been trying
to get out there, which is, I
know that young women support
Bernie Sanders, but, she hopes,
she says, to win them over.
This is not a new collision
among young feminists and older
feminists. It played out in
2008,
and it's happening again.
GWEN IFILL: Amy, did Gloria
Steinem and Madeleine Albright
step in it?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: By -- trying to shame
women into supporting a
woman is not usually the
best way to entice someone.
That's what I find, personally,
especially when you're a
candidate. That's not the best
way to get somebody
to vote for you.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
AMY WALTER: But I do want to
make a really important
distinction, which is we're
talking
about women in New Hampshire and
Iowa right now who are
overwhelmingly white.
When you look at how Bernie
Sanders does in New Hampshire
and Iowa among young people,
huge gap. But when I went and
looked at the polls that were
taken in South Carolina, which
is a much more diverse
electorate, Hillary Clinton
holds her own among younger
voters.
So, what I'm very curious to see
is if this generational gender
collision continues once
we get into states that
are a lot more diverse.
That said, it's the challenge
that Hillary Clinton has had
really since 2008, which,
is you know, they say you like
to campaign in poetry and govern
in prose. She campaigns
in prose and governs in prose.
And there is very little poetry
there and. We saw that
poetry problem again this week.
GWEN IFILL: Tam, let's stick
with the Clintons for a moment,
because Bill Clinton, who is
no stranger of the highways and
byways of the Manchester
pre-primary, came out last
night and said some pretty hard
thing. He kind of piled on and
seemed kind of irritated
at the idea that Bernie Sanders
would criticize his wife.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, I think that
Bill Clinton feels like Bernie
Sanders has had sort of
a garden path here, that Bernie
Sanders hasn't been put to the
same scrutiny as Hillary
Clinton.
And it seems like Bill Clinton
is saying, all right, well, if
nobody else is going to
do it, I'm going to do it. And,
again, it's not clear how well
this is going to play.
The Sanders camp and Sanders
supporters are pretty upset with
Bill Clinton. Of course,
that is Bill Clinton's right to
do that, and he did something --
some similar things in
2008.
I think that, as it's clear that
Hillary Clinton is going to have
a -- I mean, she's, in all
likelihood, not going to win
here, and not even close, as
it's clear that she has a
tougher
path. I think Bill Clinton is --
as they say, the big dog might
be getting off leash a little
bit.
GWEN IFILL: Boy, it feels like
we have had that very
conversation, 2008 especially.
And
that was when he was critical of
Barack Obama for the same
reason, saying that he felt like
he hadn't gotten
enough scrutiny.
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: Right.
GWEN IFILL: But let's move to
the Republicans. Saturday night,
big debate in the old town,
and Marco Rubio was generally
seen initially as not having
done terribly well because he
came off as somewhat robotic.
Was that real or was that kind
of overblown, Amy?
AMY WALTER: Well, we're going to
know a lot more tomorrow night.
GWEN IFILL: Yes. Yes.
But, look, I think that where
Marco Rubio was headed before
that debate was on a big
wave of momentum after Iowa.
When you talked to people
privately, they said they could
see his numbers move up in New
Hampshire. It was all about
closing strongly, right,
which is what he wanted to do,
is build that momentum and then
close strong, and then maybe
even win New Hampshire, or at
least come very close to Donald
Trump.
That momentum at best has been
stalled. Maybe he's even gone
backwards. But I do agree that
we sometimes make too much of
these debates, right? It's not
just the people that are
watching
them. It's a small subset. But
many people in New Hampshire are
doing other things, are
thinking about other things.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Including the
Super Bowl, perhaps.
AMY WALTER: Perhaps.
And what we think is really
important, this -- or the media
thinks is very important,
this idea that he's robotic,
that he never changes his
message, is actually not a
problem
for a candidate. We talk about
candidates needing to be
message-disciplined. Most voters
are spending .000005 percent of
their time hearing politics,
listening to politics. If
you say the same message over
and over again, it gets through.
GWEN IFILL: That's what sticks.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let's talk
about the larger question,
because you had a good story on
NPR today, Tam, about Trump,
Donald Trump and his similarity
to Bernie Sanders, talking
about message and the things
they actually say and their
appeal, not just how they do
in a debate.
TAMARA KEITH: Absolutely.
And there are many things where
they are nowhere near each
other. Let's just establish
that.
But there are surprising areas
where they overlap, things like
preserving Social Security
or even expanding Social
Security, not cutting Social
Security benefits,
infrastructure,
and simply the way they talk
about this feeling that the
American dream is maybe not
within
reach in a way it
was in the past.
They are tapping into many of
the same things and using many
of the same phrases to talk
about those things, also trade.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let's be
completely clear about
something, and that's that we
don't
know what's going to happen
tomorrow night. As a matter of
fact, Dixville Notch starts
voting at midnight. I love
this part of the year.
But there is a big expectations
game under way. And 24 hours
out, Amy, what is the
expectations
game? How would you sum it up?
AMY WALTER: On the Democratic
side, it's that Bernie Sanders
wins, but by what margin? And
on the Republican side, Trump
wins, again, what margin, and,
more important, what happens
to the non-Trump, non-Cruz
candidates, the Kasich, Rubio,
Bush, Christie?
Will one or more of those
candidates drop out after New
Hampshire, and then the rest
of those folks coalesce
around the one who's left?
GWEN IFILL: How does the
expectations game feel on the
ground, Tam?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, Ted Cruz
today was actually trying to
lower expectations, which is not
something that he did before
Iowa. Of course, this is a very
different state and less
friendly
territory for him.
And Hillary Clinton has been for
months saying, well, you know,
Bernie Sanders is from a
neighboring
state. I think that the Clinton
camp is prepared to lose in Iowa
-- is prepared to lose here
in New Hampshire. It's not clear
how much that will be by. And
also Bernie Sanders is
also tempering expectations,
saying, you know, New Hampshire
has been very friendly to the
Clintons. I think nobody wants
to lose the expectations game.
GWEN IFILL: And they're
perfectly aware of how volatile
last-minute voting is in New
Hampshire.
Tamara Keith, get out with those
voters. Amy Walter, start
reading those exit polls. And
we will talk to you
both tomorrow night.
Tune in on Thursday night at
9:00 p.m. Eastern, when Judy and
I host a "PBS NewsHour"
Democratic
presidential debate in
partnership with Facebook from
the University of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the
growing effort to rein in the
mosquito-borne Zika virus
spreading
through parts of South and
Central America. It is suspected
of being the cause devastating
birth defects in children who
are born to women who become
infected during pregnancy.
Our science correspondent, Miles
O'Brien, has been reporting on
developments from Brazil,
which has been
hard-hit by the virus.
Tonight, he looks at ways
doctors and scientists are
racing to get ahead of the
outbreak.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's Carnival
week in Brazil, the raucous
run-up to Lent, when people take
to the streets to party their
worries away. But this year,
it's harder to mask reality,
as a frightening epidemic also
marches through the nation.
DR. ADRIANA SCAVUZZI,
Obstetrician: They come to us
asking many questions, and we
cannot
say almost nothing with 100
percent sure. What we have to do
is to support them. That's
all we have to do.
MILES O'BRIEN: Dr. Adriana
Scavuzzi is an obstetrician at
one of the largest hospitals
in Recife, the epicenter of a
fast-moving outbreak of the Zika
virus, a flavivirus virus
in the same family as yellow
fever, West Nile and dengue.
In each case, the virus
hitchhikes on a tenacious
day-biting mosquito called Aedes
aegypti that
has origins in Africa and is now
spreading throughout the globe.
Two-month-old Nicollas
(ph) Pereira has an abnormally
small head, microcephaly.
Doctors at this hospital would
normally see 10 cases like this
a year. But starting in
August, there were
suddenly 10 to 20 a month.
Dr. Ana Van Der Linden is a
pediatric neurologist. She says
Nicollas must contend with an
array
of permanent mental and
physical problems.
DR. ANA VAN DER LINDEN,
Pediatric Neurologist (through
translator): With this
impairment,
we see that reflex reactions are
good, but voluntary actions that
depend on better brain
development will be impaired. He
will have bad motor skills and
mental development. He
can also have abnormal vision,
hearing disorders and bone
malformation.
MILES O'BRIEN: His mother,
Elizangela, says she developed a
rash while she was pregnant.
As it turns out, she had the
Zika virus, apparently after a
mosquito bite.
ELIZANGELA PEREIRA, Mother
(through translator): Sometimes,
I worry. Sometimes, I wonder if
he will survive, but I always
believe that God will help. My
only fear is losing him.
But I'm at peace.
MILES O'BRIEN: Elizangela's
personal tragedy is part of an
unprecedented global mystery.
DR. LAURA RODRIGUES, London
School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine: I think this is one
of the most unexpected
epidemiological situations,
maybe in decades.
MILES O'BRIEN: Laura Rodrigues
is an epidemiologist with the
London School of Hygiene and
Tropical
Medicine who raced to her home
country to help answer some
questions in a hurry.
Even the numbers are a
challenge. Brazilian government
health workers are investigating
more than four thousand
suspected microcephaly cases
that might be linked to Zika.
DR. LAURA RODRIGUES: There is so
much we don't know, and one of
the things we don't know
is exactly how many babies are
affected. Right now, there are
pregnant women being exposed
and possibly infected. It's
very difficult to predict.
MILES O'BRIEN: Zika's enigmatic
history offers us few clues. It
was first isolated in Uganda
in 1947. It circulated in Africa
and a broad stretch of Asia,
then popped up in the Pacific
in 2007. The biggest outbreak,
in 2013, was in French
Polynesia, an estimated 19,000
cases.
But over the years, no one paid
a lot of attention to Zika
because the symptoms are
generally
mild. In fact, four out of five
never know they have it. No one
is sure why it took such
a vicious turn.
DR. LAURA RODRIGUES: It could be
biogenetic mutation of the
virus, and it could be that
just once they escaped Africa
and got into urban, very densely
populated areas, it was
easier to transmit, or it could
be something else, the mosquito
maybe. It's all happening
very, very fast.
MILES O'BRIEN: Making a smoking
gun connection between Zika in
mothers and microcephaly in
their unborn children is a
challenge for scientists.
By the time infants are
diagnosed, the virus is usually
long gone. But here in Recife,
the case grew stronger last
week. At this government lab,
researchers used a new test
and found Zika antibodies in the
spinal fluid of 12 babies with
microcephaly, meaning the
virus can reach the baby's
nervous system and brain in
utero. Researchers believe the
virus targets nerve cells
as a fetus develops.
RAFAEL FRANCA, Immunologist: So
this is where we keep the virus.
MILES O'BRIEN: Rafael Franca
(ph) is an immunologist here. He
showed me the deep freeze where
they
keep the Zika samples for
research that will lay the
groundwork for a better
diagnostic
test, therapies and maybe
one day a vaccine.
RAFAEL FRANCA: I cannot say that
we have the situation under
control. I believe now the
only way to control virus'
spreading is to eliminate the
vector.
MILES O'BRIEN: That vector is
the mosquito. In nearly every
case, Zika is transmitted
by a mosquito bite. The
Brazilian government has
deployed nearly 250,000 troops
to wage
war with the insects.
They have been spraying
insecticides and adding
larvicides to standing water
where mosquitoes
lay their eggs.
Gaspar Canuto is a Recife
government health worker.
How much of this is to show the
public you are doing something?
GASPAR CANUTO, Public Health
Worker (through translator): One
hundred percent of this action
is aiming to reduce the
incidence of mosquitoes and also
of the disease.
MILES O'BRIEN: Efforts like
this, while well-intentioned,
seem unlikely to stop the
outbreak anytime
soon in Brazil or in other
countries hit by Zika,
especially in Latin America.
The scale of this is pretty
mind-boggling. A single female
mosquito in her short lifetime
will lay hundreds of eggs. And
she's looking for a place like
this, standing water, not
much more than a puddle. But
what is really interesting is,
that's about al the water
she needs.
With all this in mind, the
Brazilian government is warning
citizens that standing water can
be dangerous. But in this slum
in Recife, there is no running
water.
DR. ADRIANA SCAVUZZI: Can you
imagine a family that they don't
have even tap water? They
have to keep water in the
containers. So it makes the
perfect environment for the
mosquito.
To try to solve the medical
problem won't be enough. You
have to change the quality
of people's life. Otherwise, you
will not solve this problem.
MILES O'BRIEN: Doctors here say
the biggest frustration is they
can't fix what ails these
babies, all because of a single
mosquito bite. It has
dramatically changed
Elizangela's life.
She had to quit her job as a
farmworker to care for little
Nicollas.
ELIZANGELA PEREIRA (through
translator): I think I will be
here at the hospital forever.
I do not know if he will be able
to walk. I don't know, but I
believe that God will
help me.
MILES O'BRIEN: One woman's sad,
but hopeful prayer this Carnival
season. It's still a
time to try and forget your
troubles, but in Brazil this
year, a steady drumbeat of
worry seems
impossible to ignore.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Recife, Brazil.
GWEN IFILL: It's been a
generation since the Cold War
ended, a standoff that dominated
much of the 20th century.
But now echoes of that conflict
are sounding again, as the U.S.
and its allies encounter
a resurgent Russia.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret Warner
reports.
MARGARET WARNER: NATO is
planning its biggest buildup in
Eastern Europe since the Cold
War,
all to deter a newly
assertive Russia.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: We haven't had to
worry about this for 25 years.
And while I wish it were
otherwise, now we do.
MARGARET WARNER: Last week,
Defense Secretary Ash Carter
proposed to quadruple U.S.
spending
on its -- quote -- "European
reassurance initiative" to $3.4
billion.
ASHTON CARTER: That will fund a
lot of things: more rotational
U.S. forces in Europe, more
training and exercising with our
allies, more prepositioned
war-fighting gear and
infrastructure
improvements to
support all this.
MARGARET WARNER: This week in
Brussels, NATO's defense
ministers will discuss setting
up
outposts along its eastern front
to do just that. But is this
wise or necessary?
Evelyn Farkas just left her post
as assistant secretary of
defense for Russia, Ukraine and
Eurasia.
EVELYN FARKAS, Former Defense
Department Official: This is
something that we absolutely
need
to do. It is a sign of our
resolve. It's a sign that the
United States is there with
our NATO allies, that we're
there also to send a signal to
Russia. I mean, it's clearly
a deterrent effort.
MARGARET WARNER: But Jack
Matlock, ambassador to the
Soviet Union from 1987 to 1991,
warns
it will simply provoke Russian
leader Vladimir Putin into
further aggressive moves.
JACK MATLOCK, Former U.S.
Ambassador to the Soviet Union:
I think it's a bad idea. I think
it's not necessary. I think it's
going to lead to even more
confrontation with Russia.
And, probably, simply they will
move more of their military
equipment to the border.
MARGARET WARNER: Estonia's
ambassador to the U.S., Eerik
Marmei, echoes all three Baltic
nations in insisting they
need the protection.
EERIK MARMEI, Estonian
Ambassador to the United States:
It a very clear sign of the U.S.
commitment
to enhance the deterrence in
Europe, and especially in the
eastern part of Europe in the
coming
years.
MARGARET WARNER: Why
do you need more?
EERIK MARMEI: What we have seen
in recent years is the change of
security environment
in Europe. We have seen that
Russia has violated main
principles of international
agreements,
law.
MARGARET WARNER: He's referring
to Russia's 2008 invasion of the
former Republic of Georgia,
capturing two pro-Russian
territories. It triggered the
deepest rift between Russia
and the West since the
fall of the Soviet Union.
Tensions exploded anew in 2014,
when Russia invaded and annexed
the Crimean Peninsula
of the former Soviet
Republic of Ukraine.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
This strategic territory should
be under strong and stable
sovereignty, which, in fact,
could be today only Russian.
MARGARET WARNER: The Kremlin
then provoked war in mainland
Ukraine's East between
pro-Russian
separatists and government
forces. With more than 9,000
dead, the conflict continues.
Also sounding alarms in the
West, Russia's recent
multibillion-dollar military
buildup,
with large-scale ground
exercises, overflights of
neighbors and a spike in
submarine activity.
NATO's commander in Europe, U.S.
General Philip Breedlove, has
issued repeated warnings.
GEN. PHILIP BREEDLOVE, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander: Russia
is blatantly attempting
to change the rules and
principles that have been the
foundation of European security
for
decades.
MARGARET WARNER: But how far do
Putin's ambitions extend? It's
one thing to reassert influence
in former Soviet republics, like
Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova.
But would he really move
against once independent
countries the Soviets took over
during World War II who are now
free members of the
NATO alliance?
NARRATOR: This union of 12
nations became known as the
North Atlantic Treaty
Organization,
or, more simply, NATO.
MARGARET WARNER: NATO was formed
in April 1949 with 12 members to
defend themselves
from the Soviet Union based on
the principle of an attack on
one is an attack on all.
But after the Berlin Wall fell
in 1989 and the Soviet Union
collapsed in 1991, many former
Soviet satellite states and
Republicans sought and won the
protection of NATO's security
umbrella. Most galling to the
Russians was NATO's 2004
incorporation of three tiny
Baltic
states, former Soviet
Republicans where many ethnic
Russians still live, Lithuania,
Latvia,
and Estonia.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: We will defend
our NATO allies, and that means
every ally.
MARGARET WARNER: In September
2014, after the Ukraine crisis
erupted, President Obama
went to Estonia to reassure the
Baltics and to warn the
Russians.
BARACK OBAMA: So, if, in such a
moment, you ever ask again, who
will come to help, you
will know the answer,
the NATO alliance.
MARGARET WARNER: But is Russia
actually a threat to its Baltic
neighbors?
EVELYN FARKAS: Absolutely.
Absolutely. You know, all of the
countries on Russia's periphery
have been either invaded by
Russia and occupied. The Russian
government, this Kremlin has a
foreign policy that essentially
asserts their right to have
political and economic control
over their periphery.
MARGARET WARNER: What do you
assess is Putin's intention
vis-a-vis these countries?
EVELYN FARKAS: Regionally, he
wants to maintain this political
and economic control. It doesn't
mean he has to invade every
country. He can also try to
undermine the countries through
other means.
JACK MATLOCK: I don't think
there's any possibility of
Russia making an incursion in
the Baltic
states.
MARGARET WARNER: Former
Ambassador Matlock says the
Russians are simply responding
to
what they see as NATO squeezing
them by expanding right up to
the Russian border.
JACK MATLOCK: In their eyes,
they have not committed
aggression, that they are
responding
to aggression from the West, and
particularly from the United
States, which they accuse,
I think unfairly, but sincerely,
of trying to encircle them with
military bases.
MARGARET WARNER: Western leaders
concede they have little insight
into what drives Putin
or what he intends. But mutual
hostility is growing and,
Matlock warns, dangerous.
JACK MATLOCK: There has been
created a almost Cold War
atmosphere of hostility. In that
atmosphere, you are going to
make it very difficult to
cooperate on bigger issues.
MARGARET WARNER: For example, he
says, battling Islamic State
terrorism. And then there's
the nuclear threat
between two superpowers.
JACK MATLOCK: It would be a
catastrophe to get into a war
with Russia. And it seems to
me that you need to deal
with a certain prudence.
MARGARET WARNER: Do you think
that we are sliding into some
kind of new Cold War in
our relationship with Russia?
Should it make us tread more
carefully?
EVELYN FARKAS: Not necessarily.
I mean, we should always tread
carefully, but if by that
you mean that we shouldn't
signal resolve to Russia, I
would say no. We have to signal
resolve to Russia.
MARGARET WARNER: The next signal
of that resolve should come in
Brussels later this week.
In Washington, I'm Margaret
Warner for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later tonight on
PBS, a new documentary from
"Independent Lens" showcases
Misty Copeland the first
African-American woman to be
named principal dancer at New
York City's American Ballet
Theater, one of the country's
most prestigious dance
companies.
Here's a preview.
MISTY COPELAND, Ballerina: It
all kind of hit me at once,
moving to New York, realizing
I was the only African-American
woman in a company of 80
dancers.
I felt like I was sinking for a
while. I felt alone in a world
that had become my home.
There's just generations of
white girls who can see
themselves as ballerinas. It's,
like,
not even a question, because
everyone looks like them on
stage. And it's like this
psychological
thing where, you know, we don't
see ourselves up there, so it's
not something we think we
can even dream.
I think people think that,
sometimes, I focus too much on
the fact that I'm a black
dancer.
I have heard it from, you know,
former principal dancers in
major ballet companies, who
complain
about my presence and my voice.
I don't think that people
realize what a feat it is being
a black woman. But that's so
much
of who I am, and I think it's
so much a part of my story.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wow.
That's something.
Tune in later tonight to catch
the full "Independent Lens"
documentary, "A Ballerina's
Tale." You
can check your local
listings for the time.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online right now: American
students learning Arabic can
get extra help practicing their
skills by connecting with Syrian
refugees who need work.
Learn more about how one Web
site is bridging worlds through
conversation. All that and
more is on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, special coverage of
the New Hampshire primary at the
regular "NewsHour" time and
11:00 p.m. Eastern.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online.
And a reminder: This Thursday at
9:00 p.m. Eastern, Judy and I
moderate the Democratic
presidential debate, in
partnership with Facebook, from
the University of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.